Instructions for the impatient

You should really read the document entitled `Read This First'
(readThisFirst.ps.Z) but if you want to get started right away, this
file contains the basics.


How to start and stop SELF

Make sure that the SELF Virtual Machine (the program named Self) is in
your command search path. You should be running OpenWindows or X, and
$DISPLAY should refer to a suitable X display (see the requirements
above).

To start SELF, type "Snapshot" at the UNIX prompt:

--------------------
% Snapshot

	Welcome to the Self system!

Copyright 1992, 1993, 1994, 1995 Sun Microsystems, Inc. and 
Stanford University.
See the LICENSE file for license information.

Type _Credits for full credits.

VM version: 4.0.5

Server started.
"Self 1" 
--------------------

If all is well, the system will start the programming environment and
display the on-line tutorial.

To exit the system, you can use the `quit' item from the middle-button
background menu from within the programming environment.

If you have any problems when using the system, refer to the help file
in the documentation (help.txt).


System requirements

To run SELF you will need a SPARC-based Sun computer or clone running
SunOS 4.1.X or Solaris 2.3 or 2.4. To use the programming environment
you will need to run X Windows version 11 or OpenWindows on an 8-bit
or deeper color display. The X server need not reside on the same host
as SELF.

To run the distributed system (including on-line tutorial, Web browser
and Smalltalk emulator) well, the SELF system requires a host machine
with 48 Mb of RAM or more. Further, the system places high demands on
the CPU. We do not recommend its use on anything slower than a
SparcStation-10. In particular, user interaction on a SparcStation-1
or 2 is unlikely to be acceptable; a SparcStation-5, 10 or 20 is fine.

The user interface makes substantial demands of the X server. A
graphics accelerator (such as a GX card) improves the responsiveness
of the user interface significantly, and therefore we recommend that
you use one if possible.


